docs, conditional-field-container: update patterns and initial release of component (#1984)
agriculturegovau/agds-next: packages/react/src/conditional-reveal/docs/overview.mdx

---
title: Conditional Reveal
description: A standardised pattern for conditionally hiding and revealing the amount of content a user views in a form.
group: Forms
storybookPath: /story/Forms-ConditionalReveal--basic
unreleased: true
figmaGalleryNodeId: REPLACE_ME
relatedPatterns: ['conditional-reveal']
---

This component aims to standardise the styling and behavior of the [conditional reveal pattern](/patterns/conditional-reveal) in the Design System.

> The conditional reveal component does not wrap the children in a [FormStack](/components/form-stack), you may wrap them but it is not required if the parent element is a [Stack](/components/stack) or [FormStack](/components/form-stack).

Reviewer: Interesting. What was the reasoning for not wrapping it?

Author: My original though was that it should be in the same parent element as the structure I would have created with a conditional reveal, as it would rely on the parent for spacing (flex/grid gap). If people were using a `FormStack` it should inherit that spacing (or another one if they chose).

```
<div styles={{flex, gap, etc}}>
  <select />
  { isVisible &&
    <Input />
  }
</div>
```

However the more I think about it, it we wanted to change the styling on the conditional reveal, we would need to wrap it anyways so it is most likely going to be wrapped with a div/stack. I'm changing it to be wrapped with a `FormStack` for same spacing and it's what we are encouraging people to use.

```jsx live
() => {
	const [value, setValue] = React.useState();
	const handlerForKey = React.useCallback((key) => () => setValue(key), []);
	const isChecked = (key) => key === value;

	return (
		<FormStack>
			<ControlGroup block label="Preferred contact method" required>
				<Radio checked={isChecked('phone')} onChange={handlerForKey('phone')}>
					Phone
				</Radio>
				<Radio checked={isChecked('email')} onChange={handlerForKey('email')}>
					Email
				</Radio>
			</ControlGroup>

> 			<ConditionalReveal visible={isChecked('phone')}>

Reviewer: Shouldn't we have 2 possible reveals?

Author: I originally wanted to be able to have the user trigger hide and show so they can toggle between the two in the examples but I think you're right it looks weird without the 2nd option

Author: Updated to match examples in pattern page [167a732](https://github.com/agriculturegovau/agds-next/pull/1984/commits/167a73229564ac200c017719efdc8795de3a92cc)

				<TextInput inputMode="numeric" label="Phone number" required />
			</ConditionalReveal>
		</FormStack>
	);
};
```

<DoHeading />

> - use to hide and reveal additional content in forms that may not be relevant

Reviewer: Eh? Not relevant?

Author: Removed in page [167a732](https://github.com/agriculturegovau/agds-next/pull/1984/commits/167a73229564ac200c017719efdc8795de3a92cc)

> - position directly after the related set of question or input

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- position directly after the related set of questions or input
```

Reviewer: "or input" could be misconstrued as doing the original pattern…

Author: Updated to `position directly after the related set of questions` [167a732](https://github.com/agriculturegovau/agds-next/pull/1984/commits/167a73229564ac200c017719efdc8795de3a92cc)

> - list all related content as children in the same conditional reveal component.

Reviewer: list? feels weird

Author: I changed `list` to `insert`. Could also be `position`?

<DontHeading />

- use this component for any other content than forms
- nest additional conditional reveal components inside of a conditional reveal

> - execute API calls or run heavy processing operators inside the conditional reveal

Reviewer: This feels weirdly specific. What does it mean and how would you do that?

Author: I wanted to put this one down because we are unmount rather than hiding, so if someone put an API call onMount on a component in the conditional reveal (eg. make a call do get select options) it doesn't risk call every time it's rendered. Is this something thats out of our control?

Reviewer: I see. I think consumers could cache those if necessary, so I'd remove it

## Single value field

Where one input value can be selected (eg. radio or select inputs), you can use multiple conditional reveals to selectively render the conditional content.

```jsx live
() => {
	const [value, setValue] = React.useState(null);
	const handlerForKey = React.useCallback((e) => setValue(e.target.value), []);
	const isChecked = (key) => value === key;

	return (
		<FormStack>
			<Select
				placeholder="Please select"
				label="How would you like to be contacted?"
				onChange={handlerForKey}
				options={[
					{ value: 'textMessage', label: 'Text message' },

> 					{ value: 'email', label: 'E mail' },

Reviewer: ```suggestion
					{ value: 'email', label: 'Email' },
```

				]}
				required
				value={value}
			/>

			<ConditionalReveal visible={isChecked('textMessage')}>
				<TextInput inputMode="text" label="Mobile phone number" required />
			</ConditionalReveal>

			<ConditionalReveal visible={isChecked('email')}>
				<TextInput type="email" label="Email address" required />
			</ConditionalReveal>
		</FormStack>
	);
};
```

## Multiple value fields

> If the same input can create multiple conditional revealed fields or content (such as a checkbox input), you can use one conditional reveal component and apply conditional rendering in the children. Using multiple conditional rendering will create multiple dividers.

Reviewer: The last sentence hints that it's bad, but doesn't tell you not to do it

			),
		[]
	);
	const isChecked = (key) => value.includes(key);

	return (
		<FormStack>
			<ControlGroup block label="How would you like to be contacted?" required>
				<Checkbox
					checked={isChecked('email')}
					onChange={handlerForKey('email')}
				>
					Email
				</Checkbox>
				<Checkbox
					checked={isChecked('phone')}
					onChange={handlerForKey('phone')}
				>
					Phone
				</Checkbox>
				<Checkbox
					checked={isChecked('textMessage')}
					onChange={handlerForKey('textMessage')}
				>
					Text message
				</Checkbox>
			</ControlGroup>

			<ConditionalReveal visible={Boolean(value.length)}>
				{isChecked('email') && (
					<TextInput label="Email address" required type="email" />
				)}
				{isChecked('phone') && (
					<TextInput inputMode="numeric" label="Phone number" required />
				)}
				{isChecked('textMessage') && (
					<TextInput inputMode="numeric" label="Mobile phone number" required />
				)}
			</ConditionalReveal>
		</FormStack>
	);
};
```

## Multiple related content

If you require more than one field and/or content, place all relevant elements as children of the conditional reveal component.

```jsx live
() => {

> 	const [value, setValue] = React.useState('post');

Reviewer: Perhaps not have this selected by default so people can see it appear?

Author: Updated to match examples in pattern page [167a732](https://github.com/agriculturegovau/agds-next/pull/1984/commits/167a73229564ac200c017719efdc8795de3a92cc)

	const handlerForKey = React.useCallback((key) => () => setValue(key), []);
	const isChecked = (key) => key === value;

	return (
		<FormStack>
			<ControlGroup block label="How would you like to be contacted?" required>
				<Radio checked={isChecked('post')} onChange={handlerForKey('post')}>
					Post
				</Radio>
				<Radio checked={isChecked('email')} onChange={handlerForKey('email')}>
					Email
				</Radio>
			</ControlGroup>

> 			<ConditionalReveal visible={isChecked('post')}>

Reviewer: Do we need another one for email address?

Author: Updated to match examples in pattern page [167a732](https://github.com/agriculturegovau/agds-next/pull/1984/commits/167a73229564ac200c017719efdc8795de3a92cc)

---

> title: Conditional Reveal

Reviewer: FYI we use sentence case
```suggestion
title: Conditional reveal
```

	const handlerForKey = React.useCallback((key) => () => setValue(key), []);
	const isChecked = (key) => key === value;

	return (
		<FormStack>
			<ControlGroup label="Preferred contact method" required block>
				<Radio checked={isChecked('email')} onChange={handlerForKey('email')}>
					Email
				</Radio>
				<Radio checked={isChecked('phone')} onChange={handlerForKey('phone')}>
					Phone
				</Radio>
				<Radio
					checked={isChecked('textMessage')}
					onChange={handlerForKey('textMessage')}
				>
					Text message
				</Radio>
			</ControlGroup>

			<ConditionalReveal visible={isChecked('email')}>
				<TextInput type="email" label="Email address" required />
			</ConditionalReveal>
			<ConditionalReveal visible={isChecked('phone')}>
				<TextInput label="Phone number" inputMode="numeric" required />
			</ConditionalReveal>
			<ConditionalReveal visible={isChecked('textMessage')}>
				<TextInput label="Mobile phone number" inputMode="numeric" required />
			</ConditionalReveal>
		</FormStack>
	);
};
```

<DoHeading />

- position directly after the related set of questions
- insert all related content as children in the same conditional reveal component.

<DontHeading />

> - use this component for any other content than forms

Reviewer: This reads really strangely. Is it saying only use within forms? Or only reveal form content?

Author: I wanted to let people know that this is a component for forms and there might be styling/layout changes in the future so they don't use it for other things.

Something like "Don't use this component for conditional reveals in non-form content."

Reviewer: That's much better wording. I wonder if renaming the component to something like `ConditionalFields` or `ConditionalFieldContainer` would help, too? The latter means existing users could make an easy name change

Author: `ConditionalFieldContainer` sound better but I was wondering if we use a conditional reveal that can also be used to reveal some non-input content, like a more info card or banner that shown (eg. a InPageAlert that notify people they may need to upload documents.) This isn't covered under the Field name.

Or this might be a pattern that we don't want people to implement?

Author: Renamed from `ConditionalReveal` to `ConditionalRevealContainer`

Author: Updated to `ConditionalFieldContainer`

> - nest additional conditional reveal components inside of a conditional reveal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- nest conditional reveal components.
```

Author: Updated in [9694d0](https://github.com/agriculturegovau/agds-next/pull/1984/commits/9694d02d980b5f4433a32c7d871467a67245c2e4)

## Single value field

Where one input value can be selected (eg. radio or select inputs), you can use multiple conditional reveals to selectively render the conditional content.

```jsx live
() => {
	const [value, setValue] = React.useState(null);
	const handlerForKey = React.useCallback((e) => setValue(e.target.value), []);
	const isChecked = (key) => value === key;

	return (
		<FormStack>
			<Select
				placeholder="Please select"
				label="How would you like to be contacted?"
				onChange={handlerForKey}
				options={[
					{ value: 'textMessage', label: 'Text message' },
					{ value: 'email', label: 'Email' },
				]}
				required
				value={value}
			/>

			<ConditionalReveal visible={isChecked('textMessage')}>
				<TextInput inputMode="text" label="Mobile phone number" required />
			</ConditionalReveal>

			<ConditionalReveal visible={isChecked('email')}>
				<TextInput type="email" label="Email address" required />
			</ConditionalReveal>
		</FormStack>
	);
};
```

## Multiple value fields

> If the same input can create multiple conditional revealed fields or content (such as a checkbox input), you can use one conditional reveal component and apply conditional rendering in the children.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the same input can create multiple conditional revealed fields or content (such as a checkbox input), use one conditional reveal component and conditional render the children within.
```

Author: Updated in [9694d0](https://github.com/agriculturegovau/agds-next/pull/1984/commits/9694d02d980b5f4433a32c7d871467a67245c2e4)

> Don't use multiple conditional reveal components. Using multiple conditional rendering will create multiple dividers.

Reviewer: This feels weird because it's actually related to the above, but it could be misconstrued since in the first example we use multiple conditional reveals. This sentence could probably be removed entirely. Also we use the typographically correct apostrophe `’` (Option+Shift+]) instead of `'`

Author: Good to note, removed the paragraph to avoid potential confusion.
Updated in [9694d0](https://github.com/agriculturegovau/agds-next/pull/1984/commits/9694d02d980b5f4433a32c7d871467a67245c2e4)

	const [value, setValue] = React.useState([]);
	const handlerForKey = React.useCallback(
		(key) => () =>
			setValue((value) =>
				value.includes(key) ? value.filter((v) => v !== key) : [...value, key]
			),
		[]
	);
	const isChecked = (key) => value.includes(key);

	return (
		<FormStack>
			<ControlGroup block label="How would you like to be contacted?" required>
				<Checkbox
					checked={isChecked('email')}
					onChange={handlerForKey('email')}
				>
					Email
				</Checkbox>
				<Checkbox
					checked={isChecked('phone')}
					onChange={handlerForKey('phone')}
				>
					Phone
				</Checkbox>
				<Checkbox
					checked={isChecked('textMessage')}
					onChange={handlerForKey('textMessage')}
				>
					Text message
				</Checkbox>
			</ControlGroup>

			<ConditionalReveal visible={Boolean(value.length)}>
				{isChecked('email') && (
					<TextInput label="Email address" required type="email" />
				)}
				{isChecked('phone') && (
					<TextInput inputMode="numeric" label="Phone number" required />
				)}
				{isChecked('textMessage') && (
					<TextInput inputMode="numeric" label="Mobile phone number" required />
				)}
			</ConditionalReveal>
		</FormStack>
	);
};
```

> ## Multiple related content

Reviewer: I don't know what this heading means

Author: Trying to find a concise heading for "Conditionally revealing a bunch of content" or "sub form". 

How about "Displaying a conditional subform"?

Reviewer: "Display multiple related fields"?

Author: Updated in [081887](https://github.com/agriculturegovau/agds-next/pull/1984/commits/081887be50e79b191da464d41737be41d3e9257b)

group: Forms
storybookPath: /story/Forms-ConditionalReveal--basic
unreleased: true

> relatedComponents: ['form-stack']

Reviewer: I'm not sure this is a related component

Author: Removed in [9694d0](https://github.com/agriculturegovau/agds-next/pull/1984/commits/9694d02d980b5f4433a32c7d871467a67245c2e4)
